Metrics/Micrometer guide (#963)
micronaut-projects/micronaut-guides: guides/micronaut-metrics/micronaut-metrics.adoc

common:header.adoc[]

We'll use https://micronaut-projects.github.io/micronaut-micrometer/latest/guide/[Micronaut Micrometer] to expose application metric data with https://micrometer.io/[Micrometer].

common:requirements.adoc[]

:containerized: MySQL
common:requirements-testcontainers.adoc[]

common:completesolution.adoc[]

== Writing the Application

common:cli-or-launch.adoc[]

[source,bash]
----
mn @cli-command@ example.micronaut.micronautguide \
    --features=data-jdbc,flyway,management,graalvm \
    --build=@build@ --lang=@lang@
----

common:build-lang-arguments.adoc[]

common:default-package.adoc[]

If you use Micronaut Launch, select Micronaut Application as application type and add `data-jdbc`, `flyway`, `management`, and `graalvm` features.

diffLink:[featureExcludes=micronaut-micrometer-core]

common:annotationprocessors.adoc[]

=== Dependencies

Add a dependency for `micronaut-micrometer-core` to add core Micrometer support:

dependency:micronaut-micrometer-core[groupId=io.micronaut.micrometer]

=== Metrics Configuration

> Several groups of metrics are enabled by default; these include system metrics (JVM info, uptime, etc.) as well as metrics tracking web requests, DataSource activity, and others. Overall metrics can be enabled or disabled, and groups can be individually enabled or disabled in configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Several groups of metrics are enabled by default; these include system metrics (JVM info, uptime, etc.), as well as metrics tracking web requests, DataSource activity, and others. Overall metrics can be enabled or disabled, and groups can be individually enabled or disabled in configuration.
```

`DataSource` metrics are enabled by default if you use the HikariCP (the default), Tomcat JDBC, or Commons DBCP connection pool.

=== Data Source configuration

Define the datasource in `src/main/resources/application.yml`.

resource:application.yml[tag=datasource]

NOTE: This way of defining the datasource properties enables us to externalize the configuration, for example for production environment, and also provide a default value for development. If the environment variables are not defined, the Micronaut framework will use the default values.

common:flyway.adoc[]

resource:db/migration/V1__schema.sql[]

During application startup, Flyway will execute the SQL file and create the schema needed for the application.

=== Domain

Create a `Book` domain class that uses https://micronaut-projects.github.io/micronaut-data/latest/guide/#sql[Micronaut Data JDBC]:

source:Book[]
callout:mapped-entity[1]
callout:mapped-entity-id[2]
callout:generated-value[3]

=== BookRepository

Next, create the `BookRepository` interface to define database operations. Micronaut Data will implement the interface at compilation time:

source:BookRepository[]
callout:jdbcrepository[1]

> <2> Specifies that `Book` is the root entity and the primary key type is `Long`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> Specifies that `Book` is the root entity, and the primary key type is `Long`.
```

callout:event-listener[4]

=== BookController

Create `BookController` to access `Book` instances (and trigger JDBC metric data):

source:BookController[]
callout:controller[number=1,arg0=/books]
callout:executes-on[2]
callout:constructor-di[number=3,arg0=BookRepository]
<4> Maps a `GET` request to `/books`, which returns a list of `Book`
<5> Maps a `GET` request to `/books/{isbn}`, which attempts to show a `Book`. This illustrates the use of a URL path variable.

=== Custom Metric
To see custom metrics in action, create a service that periodically retrieves the current Bitcoin price in USD using REST.

==== Model

We'll need a data class to represent the REST response. Create the `BitcoinPrice` class:

source:crypto/BitcoinPrice[]

callout:introspected[1]

==== Kucoin Declarative HTTP Client

Create declarative Micronaut HTTP Client interface that will be implemented at compile time:

source:crypto/PriceClient[]

callout:client[1]

==== HTTP Service Configuration

Configure the URLs for the Service ID `kucoin`.
Modify `application.yml`

resource:application.yml[tag=http-services]

<1> Same ID we used with `@Client`
<2> URL where the `books` service will reside.

==== Service

> Create the `CryptoService` class which uses `PriceClient` and updates three custom meters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a `CryptoService` class that uses `PriceClient` and updates three custom meters:
```

source:crypto/CryptoService[]
callout:singleton[1]
<2> Use constructor injection to inject `PriceClient`, `MeterRegistry`, and `ObjectMapper` beans
<3> Create a `Counter` to track the total number of updates
<4> Create a `Timer` to track the total time performing updates
<5> Create a `Gauge` to track the most recent update
<6> Use the `Scheduled` annotation to configure regular updates
<7> Update the `Timer`
<8> Increment the `Counter`
<9> Update the `Gauge` with the latest price

== Testing the Application

Create a configuration file for tests `src/test/resources/application-test.yml`.

testResource:application-test.yml[]

> <1> Configure the default datasource to use the MySQL database provided by TestContainers for the test environment. By using a specially modified JDBC URL, Testcontainers provides a disposable stand-in database that can be used without requiring modification to your application code. See https://www.testcontainers.org/modules/databases/jdbc/[Test Containers JDBC URL].

Reviewer: Should Testcontainers have the "C" capitalized? It looks like only the "T" should be capitalized. 

https://github.com/testcontainers/testcontainers-java 

Whichever one you pick, I'd do a quick search and make sure you're consistent throughout.
